---
title: "Trust"
---

Trust is powerful word. In IT world means more that you can think. 
If anybody accuses your company of doing some nasty things you are in big trouble.
Is really hard to protect of reputation when discussion is hot and
defence arguments are complex. Nobody want to read technical things which
are complicated and require logical thinking.

# Kaspersky Lab

I suppose that you've heard about USA ban for [_Kaspersky_ products][link_dhs].
Mainstream in America since many months attacks president Trump. They are still
looking for his connections with Russia. Annoyed secret service found a good
pretext to get rid of _Kaspersky_ software from crucial computers. USA even
after cold war have frigid relations with Russia. So, why they used _Kaspersky_
software, if they so much afraid them? Post-truth politics is fine. If you
follow `DHS` link you will not find any proof that _Kaspersky_ spied secret
services in USA. There is no evidence, even small piece of code, disassembled
part which shows that they prepare special software to grab data.

Few days ago _Kaspersky Lab_ released [statement][link_kasp]. They described accident which is
_root_ of problem. I will quote part of it, because it's not true
that everything stays in internet:

> The malware was detected inside a folder named “Office-2013-PPVL-x64-en-US-Oct2013.iso”.
> This suggests an ISO image mounted in the system as a virtual drive/folder.
> ...
> The user was infected with this malware for an unspecified period, while the product was inactive.
> The malware dropped from the trojanized keygen was a full blown backdoor which may have allowed third parties access to the user’s machine.
> ...
> One of the files detected by the product as new variants of Equation APT malware was a 7zip archive.
> The archive itself was detected as malicious and submitted to Kaspersky Lab for analysis, where it was processed by one of the analysts.
> Upon processing, the archive was found to contain multiple malware samples and source code for what appeared to be Equation malware.

And that's all. This is the way how antivirus works. It found something new, a sandbox
or other heuristic test showed something suspected then it sent probe into _mother spaceship_. After that it's
analyzed and signature is made. Did they read license of a program which should contain that information?

So, who say the true?

# Email

Do you have an email address? I suppose that you have at least one. Do you pay
for that? I don't think so. Well, why it is for free? Somebody gave you
part of server disk, you may store there whatever you wish. You know the answer
and if you have ever thought _deeper_ about that you might not be happy. Most
of us decide to sell our privacy, secrecy of correspondence to have free letterbox.
Certainly, we don't expect that some _person_ is reading right now our
mails, but we can expect that some program is looking for _interesting_ words
to present us better adverts. The same program might also sends some notifications
to another system if you disagree with your government, president, law in your
country, etc. _They_ might still watching you silently, without following you
around. So, do you believe that your private data are only used by a server
company and it doesn't share it with some secrete service?

# Cookies and spy services

Almost each big service use cookies to spy your activity. I disabled them by default
long time ago. Each day I see dozens notifications that if I wish
watch some service then _I have to_ enable cookies. Portals know when last time you visited
them, where you was -- geolocalization, what you was searching and they assign _to you_
an unique ID to easy recognize you. It's only tip of the iceberg what they know about your
internet activity.  Just take a look into your web browser settings -- you might find there hundreds cookies.
After many years network spying techniques evolved and right now the most popular are _spy services_,
sometimes called _stats_ or _analytics_ services. They gave possibility to watch users
in real time, they choices, search, selected pages. Did I say that even banks use _spy services_?
No? Small example -- in Poland bank sent: account number and balance -- who might care about that
data? And the funniest thing: the `GET` method was used so everyone between your computer and
_spy service_ might read that data -- [here is a link][link_mbank] (warning: polish language). Total madness.

# SSL and bank

Do you know how `SSL` work? It's good to know _something_ about it, because you use `SSL` to
connect to your bank account in _secure_ way. I'm not going to describe how it
works, but for this post important are this things: there is a _trusted certificate
authority_. Do you know issuer of certificate used by your bank? I live in Poland
and I have a account in foreign bank, but a bank branch is in my country and has
polish service. So, who is an issuer (CA) of this service? In this certain case it's
`Certum Trusted Network CA`. I suppose that you don't know this company so let
me explain. `Certum` is strictly connected with another company `Asseco`. The
last company is not well known in my country from _some reasons_. It _touches_:
* finance,
* public institutions -- stack exchange, _all tree letters insitutions in Poland_ (secret services) and more,
* telecommunication -- the main _player_ responsible for optical fibres.

It's only a part of their interest. So, the company strictly connected with
government, which has access to _main lines of internet_ in Poland is a _trusted certificate
authority_ for many institutions. It sounds like formula for invisible _man in
the middle attack_ (MITM). Is it good or bad? From one point of view we might say
that is reasonable to have that powerful company which takes care about _our
affairs_. From the other side, you can forget about _bank secrecy_, private mobile
calls. Even if you are _good citizen_ they keep eye on you without warrant. Is
it a good solution and what is the other possibility? Can you imagine that an
issuer is some _anonymous_ company from another country. Is it better
solution?

You might say that I'am a dreamer but, did you heard about French agency _ANSSI_ which _faked_ _Google_ certs
and [made _MITM_][link_anssi]?

I'm not happy with that knowledge.

---

So, do you trust that data, metadata send by your computer,
mobile phone or any other electric devices are not used to spy you?

[link_dhs]:https://www.dhs.gov/news/2017/09/13/dhs-statement-issuance-binding-operational-directive-17-01 "DHS statement"
[link_kasp]:https://www.kaspersky.com/about/press-releases/2017_preliminary-results-of-the-internal-investigation-into-alleged-incident-reported-by-us-media "Kaspersky Lab statement"
[link_anssi]:http://googleonlinesecurity.blogspot.com/2013/12/further-improving-digital-certificate.html "ANSSI accident"
[link_mbank]:https://niebezpiecznik.pl/post/uwaga-klienci-mbanku-wasze-saldo-bylo-udostepniane-zewnetrznej-firmie/ "mBank accident"
