---
title: "One thing which I learned in 2018"
---

There is one thing which I learned in this year. It's damn hard to write a valuable post 
like [this]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-09-23-spam-tools %}). It takes a lot of time for research,
gathering data and finding interesting connections. Sometimes it looks like a second job, but I like it. Unfortunately, you can't
week by week write about _big_ things. Small things happened around you and they are important too. I'm still looking for
an idea for this blog. In the meantime, you can _enjoy_ my third summarise of reading and gameplay on _Linux_. Previous 
two posts you can find [here]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-02-02-Summary_of_reading_January_2018 %})
and [here]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-05-10-summary_of_activities_February_April_2018 %}).

## Reading

###  _The Dark Forest_ (ISBN 978-83-8062-842-7) and _Death's End_ (ISBN 978-83-8062-910-3) by Cixin Liu
I took a small break after reading the first book of series _Three-Body Problem_. When I know the whole story
I argue that the first was the best one. It's interesting to _look at humanity_ when they communicate with an alien civilisation
which is going to annihilate us. From the second and third part, you can learn that even the best prognosis will be challenged with reality
and you might be surprised.

###  _The VimL Primer_ by Benjamin Klein (ISBN 978-1-68050-040-0)
Tke book about _VimL_, better known as _Vimscript_. To be honest, this book is far far away from Drew Neil's books like _Practical Vim_.
Only for strong _Vim_ believers.

###  _Brave New World_ by Aldous Huxley (ISBN 978-83-7758-404-0)
Have you ever thought, how the world may look like if you have everything, whatever you wanted? In the Aldous novel, you can find the
answer, but you may not be satisfied. 

### _The white tiger_ by Aravind Adiga (ISBN 978-83-7469-833-7)
Definitely, the best book which I read in this year. I love Aravind's irony
and how he describes the dirty world. A _beautiful_ history of a man who decided to change his life. What to say more without spoilers? You have to read it!

###  _The DevOps 2.0 Toolkit_ (ISBN 978-1523917440) and _The DevOps 2.1 Toolkit: Docker Swarm_ (ISBN 978-1542468916) both written by Viktor Farnic
You may wonder, why a _C/C++_ developer read this book? As low-level programmers we generate binary code for dedicated machines, we don't need _docker_.
You are right, but ... My company grows rapidly, 4 years ago were around 30 people, right now we have more than one hundred. In old good days I had
1 machine, right now I have a few, each of them use a different version of _Jenkins_, different configuration, etc. I decided to find out how to deal
with a scale, how easily add a new agent machine. The first book focused mostly on _raw docker_, the second one has a lot of repetitions but is a fresher
view on swarm _problem_. If you are a total beginner with _docker_ both of them it's a good choice.

### _Blood, Sweat, and Pixels: The Triumphant, Turbulent Stories Behind How Video Games Are Made_ by Jason Schreier (ISBN 978-83-8129-243-6)
10 stories from real life. Companies or even _one man hero_ had almost the same problems: overtime, overwork to finish a game.
On the one hand, the book describes _dark side_ of gamedev. Big companies take over smaller, reduce budget, impossible deadlines appear, dismissals.
On the other hand, developers and other staff have absurd ideas, make common mistakes and they deserved to suffer. Change a game engine during development,
start using new not well-known tools  -- you need extra time to become expert -- it's a ridiculous idea. Sometimes they have an elusive deadline on
the beginning and they know about it -- total madness. We all know how it ends -- crunch -- this word is overused in this book.

### _1Q84_ by Haruki Murakami, Vol. I and II (ISBN 978-83-7495-866-0, ISBN 978-83-7758-024-0)
I have a problem with this Nobel prize book. From one point of view, it's a gripping story about a woman serial killer -- she is perfect in her trade.
From the other hand, we have a history of teacher Tengo, her platonic love from childhood. This plot is simple, but others ... Secret _The little people_, even in the end
you have no idea who they are. Moreover, we have a book inside the book and kind of time travel. Everything messed up.

###  _End of watch_ by Stephen King (ISBN 978-83-7985-327-4)
Third and the last book from series _Mr. Mercedes_, _Finders Keepers_.
Good old Stephen King. This time our killer (warning -- small spoiler) uses an uncomplicated electric game for controlling players.
I see here a simple metaphor for mobile phone users going around like mindless zombies.

## Gameplay on Linux

### _Darkest Dungeon_ 
I'm a little embarrassed to mention that I spent with this game 123 hours. I made almost every challenge from the game, I beat all bosses but
I didn't finish the final _Darkest Dungeon_. Half of the mentioned time I learnt how to beat each beast -- they have different attacks, skills.
Second half was a grind: collect money and other stuff, upgrade each building, master each hero from a team. Build a well-balanced crew
is the most important part of this game. Each hero has well-known statistics like strength, armor but we have here also: stress, diseases and much more.
A stressed hero may beat his companies, change position, refuse a fight. _Darkest Dungeon_ has a lot of funny quotes and ideas. It's the first
game, where a hero refused to join to expedition because he took a day off.

###  _Rise of Tomb Raider_
I _played_ few minutes, it crashes all the time on the beginning. Unfortunately, I have seen only a menu from this game.
It surprising, because _Feral Interactive_ released _Rise of Tomb Raider_.
I mentioned them in [this post]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-05-10-summary_of_activities_February_April_2018 %})
and until now I haven't had a problem with any of their game. I suppose that they know about half-assed
_Linux_ port -- on the first screen, before the game start, you can see a notification _It may don't work well_. Can you imagine similar pop up on _Windows_ or 
_macOS_? I can't. Hopefully, the internet is full of comments and in spare time I'm going to check some clues to see something more than a menu.

### HITMAN
Since many years I wonder why most games are about killing people? This one definitely doesn't answer on this question. I enjoyed 35 hours on
hiding, sneaking, climbing and of course punching and killing. Thank you _Feral Interactive_ for _Linux_ port and I'm waiting for a second meeting with the agent 47.

---
