---
title: "Summary of 2019"
---

Yet another year almost pasted and I have no idea even when. Not the best one, but thankfully not the worst.

Let's focus only on good things:

* The first time I was in the mountains in the winter on a trip (twice!). There were days when we didn't meet anybody on
a track. I observed how Marcin made timelapses from [Beskid Sądecki][link_beskid_sadecki] and [Beskid Mały][link_beskid_maly].
He is a great photographer,
* At work, I created a fully distributed `jenkins` environment for building software. I can simply exchange base toolchains, enable
new fancy static analysis checks, and more. It's quite well prepared for _scale problems_ -- I can easily extend the number
of workers without any [IT support][link_it_support],
* I started to play [_go_][link_go]. It's definitely more complicated than chess. I still play with my _Sensei_ Jarosław. He has
16 years of experience with _go_ and how you can imagine, I still losing games even with 9 handicaps.

I had also a pleasure to read a few books. I think that the list is almost complete. If I missed something it was to short
or not worth mentioning.

### _Thinking, fast and slow_ by Daniel Kahneman (ISBN 978-83-7278-710-1)
The Polish title is _Thinking Traps_, but I think that the English version is more accurate.
Our brain has different modes, and in most cases is in the _lazy_ mode -- called here _the fast thinking_ -- 
that's the problem. We have to learn to recognise _complex_ situations and use the _slower_ part of it. In the beginning,
the book is very interesting, but closer to the end, I started noticing that presented problems are very similar.
Most of traps are math problems, or to be more specific their come from the theory of probability.

### _The Heart Against the Rock_ by Adrian Pracoń (ISBN 978-83-764-2201-5)
This time the Polish title is more meaningful: _Massacre on the island of Utøya_. The survivor describes his story.
It's not big literature, but if are you curious about what happened on Utøya, from the first hand, it's a good position.

### _Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow_ by Yuval Noah Harari (ISBN 978-83-08-06658-4)
The book about us and who we may become in the future. I don't agree with many theses presented by Yuval Noah Harari.
The worth mentioning is the thing which I had learned from it -- each of us has a different definition of happiness. You
and only you decide what makes you happy.

### _King Rat_ by James Clavell (ISBN 978-83-7998-079-6)
On the first level, it's the book about prisoners of war camp. On the second level, it's about us -- humans.

### _Thinner_ by Stephen King (ISBN 978-83-7985-231-4)
The title describes everything. A woman holds Billy under a charm. He becomes thinner and thinner. A classical King's horror.

### _Four past Midnight_ by Stephen King (ISBN 978-83-7985-223-9)
Another classical King's horror. This time all revolve around a plane and time travel.

### _Different Seasons_ by Stephen King (ISBN 978-83-7885-008-3)
Collection of novels. I hadn't recognised that I had read this book before. But when I had seen again titles
_The Shawshank Redemption_ and _Apt Pupil_, I had smiled and started reading. I suppose that most of you know the
first title, but the second novel is tremendous.

### _Humans: A Brief History of How We F*cked It All Up_ by Tom Phillips (ISBN 978-83-8125-627-8)
If you think that Trump or _lame dwarf_ is the worst thing that may happen to your country you are wrong, so wrong.
History is full of foolish, mad people. Compare your current _dictator_ with [Ibrahim][link_ibrahim]. _Humans_ describes
the most messed up lords and their fancy ideas.

### _Permanent Record_ by Edward Snowden (ISBN 978-83-66360-25-9)
I had read the first book about Edward Snowden _No Place to Hide_ by Glenn Greenwald (ISBN 978-832-681-610-9)
around 2015. It was about his disclosure, privacy, and invigilation. A great biography the _Permanent Record_ is about Edward's life.
You can find out why he had access to all `NSA` digital data and how he realised that he has to reveal
top secret documents. The funny fact is that during the reading book, the [_Pegasus – Product Description_][link_pegasus] leaked.

### _A Short History of Nearly Everything_ by Bill Bryson (ISBN 978-83-65521-27-9)
The best book of this year. It goes thought many branches of science and describes the current state of knowledge.
I was amazed many times when I found out about assumptions that took a scientist to prove something. There are so many different
opinions about basic rights, rules, and in many cases the strongest wins -- it doesn't mean that this one is true. 
The most surprising for me was the fact that even in the XXI century, we almost know nothing about oceans.

---
[link_beskid_sadecki]:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bx3-mSoC10o "youtube: Beskid Sądecki Timelapse"
[link_beskid_maly]:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AKncyV5T7P8 "youtube: Beskid Mały Timelapse"
[link_it_support]:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S2s7nsn-YpA "youtube: Every tech support call ever"
[link_go]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_(game) "wikipedia: go"
[link_pegasus]:https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/4599753-NSO-Pegasus.html "Pegasus - Product Description (pdf)"
[link_ibrahim]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ibrahim_of_the_Ottoman_Empire "wikipedia: Ibrahim of the Ottoman Empire"
